My Robotics Exploration
Ujjawal Prasad

Figure 1: SKYBOT: A drone built by me

1

Introduction

I am Ujjawal Prasad, a 3rd undergraduate student in the Department of Humanities and Social
Sciences at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Kharagpur. I am an active member of
Aerial Robotics Kharagpur (ARK) Lab, a student-led research group dedicated to the
development and innovation of aerial robotics. Outside of academics and research, I have a
strong personal interest in olympic weightlifting, which I actively pursue alongside my technical
work.

2

Research Interest

My research interests lie primarily in intersection of control systems and perception for
aerial vehicles. I have worked on enhancing drone autonomy and reliability. I also have
experience with ground rovers. Additionally, I have contributed to electrical subsystems,
complementing my core focus in robotics. An image of the drone I built is presented in Figure 1

2.1

My Projects

The following document outlines all the projects I have undertaken, either as part of competitions or through self-initiated exploration. Please refer to the table of contents to view the
listed projects.

i

Contents
1 Introduction

i

2 Research Interest
2.1 My Projects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

i
i

3 Martian Terrain Mapping with Aerial Intelligence

1

4 Autonomous Exploration in GPS-Denied Environments
4.1 Objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.2 Proposed Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.3 Sensor Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.4 Mapping with RTAB-Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.5 Occupancy Grid and Frontier Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.6 Navigation and Execution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2
2
2
2
3
4
4

5 SKYBOT Series

6

6 Autonomous Ground Rover for Search and Rescue Operations
6.1 Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.2 Proposed Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8
8
8

7 Terrain-Adaptive Autonomous Weed Removal Robot
10
7.1 Our Problem Statement and Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

ii

3

Martian Terrain Mapping with Aerial Intelligence

This project is a part of an ISRO competition [link]. Our team at ARK Lab is developing
a quadcopter to autonomously map the surface of Mars and identify suitable landing
sites. The main challenge is to design an accurate and efficient aerial mapping system that can
navigate the Martian terrain and generate detailed surface maps. I worked on the perception
and localization components of the project.

Figure 3: Mapping Software stack

Figure 2: Hardware stack

Figure 2 illustrates the hardware stack. The Intel RealSense camera provides depth images
and IMU data to the flight computer (Jetson Orin Nano) via a USB 3.2 interface. The flight
computer communicates with the Pixhawk 6C flight controller using the MAVLink protocol over
USB. Additionally, the ARK Flow optical flow sensor sends optical flow data to the Pixhawk
via the CAN protocol. Based on the processed sensor inputs, the flight controller generates the
necessary PWM signals to drive the actuators.
Figure 3 illustrates the software stack. We are using ROS 2 Humble on the Jetson Orin
Nano as the backend server. The system integrates the Intel RealSense D435i depth camera
through the librealsense2 SDK, which provides both raw depth images and IMU data. These
inputs are fed into RTAB-Map, which generates Visual-Inertial Odometry (VIO). This VIO
data is then fused with the IMU data from the Pixhawk using RTAB-Map’s internal fusion
mechanisms to produce robust SLAM (Simultaneous Localization and Mapping) data.
Since GPS is not available on Mars, which is typically crucial for position locking, we rely on
the ARK Flow optical flow sensor to maintain a stable position hold during flight.
Test video link: [link]

1

4

Autonomous Exploration in GPS-Denied Environments

Imagine a human trapped in an unfamiliar building—they look for walls, doors, and passages
to find a way out. We aim to enable robots to do the same autonomously using onboard sensors
and intelligent planning. This is the next mission for SKYBOT2 in the Skybot series Section 5.
It has been successfully implemented in simulation.

4.1

Objective

To autonomously map and explore completely GPS-denied, unmapped environments such as
collapsed or caved-in areas.

4.2

Proposed Solution

We propose an autonomous system that integrates LiDAR-based perception with real-time path
planning. This allows the robot to identify unexplored regions and make intelligent navigation
decisions without human intervention as shown in Figure 4.

Figure 4: Overall Exploration Loop

4.3

Sensor Setup

We use a GPU-based LiDAR in the Gazebo simulation environment, mounted on the opensource Open Robotics X3 UAV. The SDF file is modified to provide both PointCloud2 as
shown in Figure 5 and LaserScan formats for flexibility in processing.
Accurate mapping also requires odometry, which is estimated using:
• Visual Odometry – derived from image and depth data
• Point Cloud Matching – techniques such as Iterative Closest Point (ICP)
These odometry sources help construct the Transform Tree (TF) as shown in Figure 6,
ensuring consistent spatial alignment between the robot and the map.

2

Figure 5: Point Cloud of Simulated Environment

Figure 6: Transform tree

4.4

Figure 7: RtabMap loop detection

Mapping with RTAB-Map

RTAB-Map uses a Bag-of-Words (BoW) model to determine if a region is: (a) Ho , i.e, new
(unseen) or (b) Ha , i.e, previously seen. The map is updated incrementally as new information
becomes available, allowing the system to refine its understanding of the environment in real
time, as shown in Figure 7.

Figure 8: SLAM Process: Initial and Final Map

3

The initial and final states of the SLAM process are shown in Figure 8. A demo video is
provided for reference [link].

4.5

Occupancy Grid and Frontier Detection

3D point clouds are converted into 2D occupancy grids for easier navigation, as illustrated in
Figure 9. This is achieved by taking the horizontal plane of the point cloud relative to the
robot’s LiDAR frame.

Figure 9: 2D Occupancy Grid
In the grid shown in Figure 9: (a) Positive values are occupied, (b) 0 is Free and (c) -1 is
Unknown. The robot’s position is shown as a rectangle. Frontier cells are unknown cells
adjacent to free cells, indicating unexplored regions.
The explore lite node begins by initializing a map subscription, setting up the robot
pose listener, and configuring parameters such as the minimum frontier size and goal publish
rate. During execution, the node continuously retrieves the latest occupancy grid map and the
robot’s current position. A breadth-first search (BFS) is performed starting from the robot’s
location. The algorithm maintains a set of visited cells and a list of discovered frontiers. It
enqueues the robot’s position and iteratively checks each dequeued cell. If a cell has not been
visited and qualifies as a frontier cell, a new frontier region is grown from it. This region is
only added to the frontier list if it exceeds the minimum required size. The neighbors of each
valid cell are then explored recursively through BFS. Once all frontiers are identified, they are
ranked based on distance from the robot. The nearest reachable frontier is selected as the next
navigation goal.

4.6

Navigation and Execution

To enable autonomous exploration for the X3 UAV, we utilize a behavior tree provided by
the Nav2 stack, with goals dynamically assigned by the explore lite package. The behavior
tree is centered around the NavigateWithReplanning pipeline sequence, which integrates path
planning, path following, and recovery behaviors. Upon receiving a goal from explore lite,
the UAV first attempts to compute a global path using the ComputePathToPose node. If
planning fails, a recovery fallback clears the global costmap and retries. Once a path is computed, the FollowPath node commands the controller to execute it. If the path following fails,
a secondary recovery sequence clears the local costmap and attempts to resume navigation.
The use of RateController, recovery nodes, and costmap-clearing services ensures robustness
4

against dynamic obstacles and mapping errors, enabling continuous and adaptive exploration
in unknown environments. The whole behaviour is summarized in Algorithm 1 and Figure 10.
Algorithm Robot Behaviour Algorithm
1: Initialize Navigation Stack()
2: Initialize Explore Lite()

▷ starts explore lite node to detect

3:
4: while system active do
5:
if map has unknown areas() do
6:
frontier goal = explore lite.get next frontier()
7:
publish goal to nav2(frontier goal)
8:
while not goal reached() do
9:
sleep(1)
10:
end while
11:
else
12:
stop exploration()
13:
break
14: end while
15: shutdown system()

Figure 10: Behaviour Tree
Demo of the Algorithm 1: [link]
Code for the Algorithm 1: [link]

5

5

SKYBOT Series

My journey with aerial vehicles began when I received a DJI Tello (Figure 11) from my elder
brother on July 23. It was the first drone I could code and experiment with. Eventually, I
broke one of its motors. The repair took a long time, and my lack of understanding about how
drones work got me curious about their inner mechanisms. This curiosity led to the birth of
the SKYBOT series as shown in Figure 12.

Figure 11: DJI Tello
Figure 12: SKYBOT 1
My first aerial robot was made using an Arduino [link]. With no understanding of control
systems, I assumed the copter would fly—but it didn’t even lift off and kept toppling. I later
installed a Pixhawk [link] flight controller with PID closed-loop control, which got it airborne
[link], but it wobbled heavily. Even autotuning in QGC did not work [link].
The copter experienced multiple hardware failures during development and testing, including the failure of two motors, three ESCs, and damage to several propellers, landing gear [link]
and arm of the copter [link] as shown in Figure 13. Despite multiple PID tuning attempts and
software tweaks, the drone was not stable [link], following were the root cases identified: (a)
High KV (1400) motors are suited for high RPM, not high torque and (b) 11-inch carbon fiber
props require high torque. Key lessons learned:
• Use smaller props with high KV motors.
• Avoid carbon fiber props for beginners—they cause more frame stress during crashes.

Figure 13: SKYBOT 1 Crash

Figure 14: SKYBOT 2

6

This new variant Figure 14, incorporating improvements based on previous learnings, achieved
stable flight using the default PID settings [link]. I then began upgrading the system for autonomous missions by integrating a Jetson Orin Nano Super and an Intel RealSense D435i
depth camera, as shown in Figure 15 and Figure 16. Below are some payload testing videos:
[link 1] [link 2]

Figure 16: Final drone with all sensors
Figure 15: JETSON Integrated
This model will be tested for 3D SLAM and autonomous exploration (see Section 4). Currently, the lack of an optical flow sensor has paused the project.

Figure 17: SKYBOT3 (build in progress)
Figure 17 is a new build intended for small payload carrying tasks. The exact applications
are yet to be decided.

7

6

Autonomous Ground Rover for Search and Rescue
Operations

This project was developed as part of the Hardware Modeling Competition 2024–25 (Spring
Semester) held at IIT Kharagpur. Participants were tasked with identifying and solving a
real-world problem of their choice.

6.1

Problem Statement

Disasters such as earthquakes and coal mine collapses often pose severe risks for rescue personnel entering unstable environments. Deploying humans directly into such conditions can be
life-threatening. To address this challenge, we developed a compact ground rover capable of
performing autonomous mapping and detecting human presence in disaster-affected areas.

6.2

Proposed Solution

Figure 18: Voyager – Our Search and Rescue Rover
I was solely responsible for the software architecture of the system. The robot employs SLAM
(Simultaneous Localization and Mapping). In addition, it integrates an mmWave sensor to
estimate the distance to moving objects in real-time.
Why mmWave? The mmWave sensor was selected for its unique ability to detect vital signs such as human heartbeat — even through debris or obstructed environments. In
situations where a person may be trapped but still alive, the mmWave sensor can identify
micro-movements, such as chest oscillations caused by breathing or heartbeat. We conducted
multiple field tests to validate this capability, and the results were successful.

8

Figure 20: Sensor stack

Figure 19: Hardware stack

Figure 21: Mapping stack
Figure 19 The Intel RealSense camera provides both depth images and IMU data to the flight
computer (Jetson Orin Nano) via a USB 3.2 interface. The Jetson is paired with a Pixhawk
2.4.8 flight controller, and the two communicate using the MAVLink protocol over USB. Motor
drivers are directly connected to the Jetson and interface using the Modbus protocol, while an
Arduino is also connected to the Jetson through a UART interface.
Figure 21 illustrates the software stack. We are using ROS 2 Humble on the Jetson Orin
Nano as the backend server. The system integrates the Intel RealSense D435i depth camera
through the librealsense2 SDK, which provides both raw depth images and IMU data. These
inputs are fed into RTAB-Map, which generates Visual-Inertial Odometry (VIO). This VIO
data is then fused with the IMU data from the Pixhawk using RTAB-Map’s internal fusion
mechanisms to produce robust SLAM (Simultaneous Localization and Mapping) data.
Test video link: [link]

9

7

Terrain-Adaptive Autonomous Weed Removal Robot

This project was undertaken as part of the Hardware Modeling Competition 2023–24 (Spring
Semester) organized at IIT Kharagpur. Participants were allowed to choose their own problem
statements aimed at addressing real-world challenges.

7.1

Our Problem Statement and Solution

Weed removal in terrain-adaptive farms can significantly enhance crop yield and reduce manual
labor for farmers. Hence, we propose a terrain-adaptive autonomous weed removal robot as
our solution, as shown in Figure 22.

Figure 22: System Architecture of the Weed Removal Robot
I was a part of the perception team in this project. My primary responsibility was to detect
weeds in farm environments and generate bounding boxes around them (i.e., object detection).
For this task, I fine-tuned a YOLOv8 Figure 23 model using a publicly available weed and
crop dataset from Kaggle. The results are shown in Figure 24.

Figure 23: YOLOv8 Model Architecture

10

Figure 24: Detection Results on Test Set

11

